From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> Good evening, everyone.
What a good evening it is.
>> [cheering]
>> On Tuesday, a blowout in the New [music]
York primary cemented Mayor Zohran
Mamdani as a local kingmaker.
>> What you all have shown this evening,
whether for State Assembly, State
Senate, or Congress, is that a year ago,
it was not the end of a political
movement.
It was the beginning.
>> [music]
>> All of his chosen candidates won, and
their victories pointed to a growing
movement within the Democratic Party.
Today, political reporter Nick Fandos
explains whether their victories help
Democrats in the midterms or put their
chances of winning [music] control of
Congress at risk.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday, June 25th.
Nick Fandos, welcome to The Daily.
>> So glad to be here.
>> Mayor Mamdani is having a very good
couple of weeks, it seems.
>> Yeah, an incredible couple of weeks. Uh
the Knicks are NBA championships.
>> Yep.
>> The World Cup, his beloved sporting
event, is taking place just across the
river in New Jersey.
And this week, the mayor made a pretty
audacious political gamble in a series
of important congressional races in New
York City, and he won every single one
of them.
>> So, okay, as much as I want to talk to
you about the Knicks, you are here to
talk about Tuesday's election results.
And I want to understand what these
results in New York's primary tells us
about the strength of Mayor Mamdani, of
course, this rising political figure in
the Democratic Party, but also what
these results mean for the national
political picture. So, first, let's just
talk about what were the results on
Tuesday night?
>> So, on Tuesday night voters across New
York City went to the polls in a series
of very competitive congressional
primaries. Now, in New York, a very
democratic city, the primaries actually
are the elections that end up deciding
who is going to fill these seats.
>> Mhm.
>> And Mayor Mondaire did something unusual
in these elections.
Where his predecessors have tended to
try and stay out of local politics, of
the kind of bitter inner-party fights
that could divide their coalition or zap
their political capital, he decided he
was going to put all of his on the line
for a series of candidates from the
left, many of them democratic
socialists, who share his vision for the
city and he thought could win these
seats in Congress for their movement.
>> Mhm. This is a pretty extraordinary
gamble just 6 months into his term.
If he succeeded, it would give him a
foothold
>> in Congress, where he could inject
>> [music]
>> the economic populist ideas from the
left, his views on Israel, and other
issues into the national conversation
that Democrats are having right now
about their identity.
But, if he lost, he'd be squandering a
lot of his own political capital, he'd
be empowering people who are trying to
stand in his way, and frankly, I think
he'd make even some of his allies think,
"This guy's not as strong as we thought.
Maybe we don't need to go along with
what he's talking about."
>> Okay, so you've just explained sort of
the gamble of it. Let's talk a little
bit about how he decided to take the
risks that he did.
>> So, to answer this, I want to go back
all the way to last year's mayoral
campaign.
>> Great.
>> Mondaire was a little-known state
lawmaker. He was a democratic socialist.
He was the kind of guy that when he got
into the race for mayor, nobody thought
he could win.
>> Mhm.
>> And a year ago this week, he did in
remarkable fashion. He beat Andrew
Cuomo, this titan of democratic
politics.
So, from the start, it's important to
remember that Mondani is an insurgent
politician and he's a movement
politician. By the time last fall comes
around and it's clear he's going to be
elected mayor in the general election,
he's already looking ahead to this
year's races to figure out how can I
expand that movement?
>> New York,
we know anything's possible with a great
team.
I'm Brad Lander and I'll block
billionaires from buying our elections.
>> The first candidate he identifies is
Brad Lander. Now, Lander was actually a
fellow mayoral candidate whom Mondani
had beat, but then they locked arms to
take on the Democratic establishment.
And Mondani said to him as the election
is coming to a close, "You know where we
could use you most would be running for
Congress. Why don't you run in the
Brooklyn and Lower Manhattan seat where
you're from against Dan Goldman, who was
a Democratic incumbent, a former federal
prosecutor, but crucially
did not endorse Mondani in last year's
election and historically has pretty
close ties to Israel, which has become
one of the animating issues, obviously,
of the mayor's political movement."
>> Isn't it kind of bold of Mondani to take
on an incumbent politician in this way?
>> Absolutely. But in this case, Lander had
a long track record in this district and
I think both of them knew that he had a
very good shot of beating Goldman and
flipping this. And crucially, Lander was
willing to do something that Goldman
never was.
>> Which was?
>> Good evening. Welcome to New York One's
debate for the 10th Congressional
District. Both these guys
>> consider themselves liberal Zionists.
They're both Jewish. And Goldman has
been critical of Benjamin Netanyahu and
the Israeli government, but he's drawn a
line at calling what's happened in Gaza
a genocide.
>> Israel is not the most important issue
in this district. What is most important
that
>> And he's not completely denounced groups
like AIPAC, the American Israel Public
Affairs Committee, even if he didn't
take their money in this election.
Lander was willing to do those things.
>> He voted for every US military aid
package to Israel. He won't recognize it
as genocide. He's never used the word
occupation to describe
>> willing to be much more vociferous in
his criticism of Israel and in
separating himself from the kind of
pro-Israel political forces in the
United States. And for Mondaire, that
was crucial.
>> Wow, that really shows you how divisive
Israel has become.
>> That's right. But the way that he made
this a campaign issue and that he
figured it would resonate with the
voters in the district that he's known
for a very long time
was to basically say that Dan Goldman is
beholden to a special interest. He is
taking money from the pro-Israel lobby.
He is taking money from corporate
interests. And that is affecting the way
that he represents you in Washington.
And that was a pretty powerful critique
at a moment, I think, when a lot of
Democrats are thinking about the
entrenched interests of money and
corporate power in the United States.
So, it took this rather small
distinction and made it a bigger one
where he could differentiate himself.
>> And all of what you've just described,
of course, jibes with Mondaire's
positions when he first ran for mayor.
>> Absolutely. But his intervention here
also started to raise another question,
which is basically how involved is
Mondaire, this new mayor who's going to
be trying to govern an ungovernable city
as people like to call New York. How
involved is he going to get in politics?
And we started to get some answers
pretty quickly last fall.
In one counterintuitive move, he
actually intervened to shut down a
primary challenge by an ally of his in
the DSA who was looking to challenge
Hakeem Jeffries, the House Democratic
Leader.
And after his private warnings to this
ally didn't get through, Mondaire
actually showed up at a public forum and
made a case for why it would hurt his
mayoralty and their cause to go after
Jeffries in that way, to pick such a big
fight.
>> He's basically telling the guy to stand
down.
>> Exactly. And so that might have been
where this all ended.
But in late November, one of Mondaire's
allies in Congress, Nydia Velázquez,
who's been there for 30 years, announces
unexpectedly that she's going to retire.
>> There's going to be a lot of people
interested in this seat. I believe
you've said there there's no heir
apparent. [music]
>> I want to see a strong, independent,
progressive public servant.
>> And the district that she represents is
one of the city's farthest left.
>> [music]
>> It's also the place that Mondaire ran up
the largest margins anywhere in the
city. And so when she retires, he sees a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity
to put one of his allies into that seat
and expand his foothold in Congress
beyond just Lander. It's too good to
pass up.
As it happens, Mondaire had someone very
particular in mind. A young
assemblywoman named Claire Valdez, who
had been [music] his first endorser in
the race for mayor and a fellow
democratic socialist.
>> [music]
>> Velázquez didn't know her at all.
>> Mhm. It is what it is. I have a lot of
respect for the for the mayor, and I
guess that we disagree this time.
[music]
>> She felt Mondaire blindsided her and was
meddling in the race. She ends up
backing another candidate, the Brooklyn
Borough President, Antonio Reynoso.
>> Knowing my district, knowing my
communities, I decided to step in and
endorse Antonio.
>> And why did he prefer his candidate
Valdez over the handpicked successor
from Velázquez?
>> It's a great question. And on paper,
there's not a huge amount of difference
in these two candidates in terms of
policy. They both want to abolish ICE.
They both have called what happened in
Gaza a genocide. They both support
raising taxes on the rich as the mayor
does.
But Valdez comes out of the mayor's
political movement. Remember I said he's
a movement guy. She was with him on day
one when very few people were.
>> Claire was there. If you look at
photographs of the New York left over
the last 8 years, a canvas in 2018, UAW
picket line.
>> And he felt basically, yeah, that guy's
progressive. I like him, but Claire is
my candidate.
>> And now we need to be able to do
everything we can to get her across that
finish line.
>> And what follows [music] is this really
fascinating race
that drives a kind of geographic line
through the district and through
Mamdani's coalition, where on one side
you have young, very left, maybe DSA
inclined voters who are more often white
and college educated than their
neighbors who have moved into this
district over the last 10 years.
And on the other side you had Reynoso
and Velázquez who represented and were
appealing to kind of the old guard of
the neighborhood, the the large Puerto
Rican and Dominican populations that
grew there, the working-class black
populations, the other immigrant
populations in neighborhoods that have
not gentrified in quite the same way.
>> Which is so interesting because here's
Mamdani, a candidate who had attracted
both of those groups, now driving a
wedge between the two of them with his
endorsement of Valdez.
>> Right. And so Mamdani is jeopardizing
the very coalition that he worked so
hard to build. And it might have stopped
there, actually, in another year.
But he kept going.
Because as the spring progressed, he had
his eye on another district. This one
was in Upper Manhattan and parts of the
Bronx. It's a heavily Latino district.
It's got a big black population. [music]
But, similarly to the race we were just
talking about a gentrifying white
community that's coming in and changing
parts of that district.
Now, the interesting wrinkle here is
that initially Mamdani stayed out of
this [music] race because he had
actually promised the incumbent
Congressman, Adriano Espaillat,
that he would be with him.
Espat [music] had given Mondani a key
endorsement during the mayoral race,
brought along Latino support that he
needed at the time,
>> [music]
>> and in private, we reported, they had a
handshake deal. The mayor said, "I'll
return the favor if you ever need it."
And so, even though his allies on the
left were lining up behind a challenger
to Espat, a woman named Darlene Avila
Chevalier,
>> [music]
>> Mondani initially stayed on the
sidelines.
But as the spring progresses, and Avila
Chevalier is picking up momentum, as
[music] the DSA endorses her,
he starts thinking to himself, "I can't
stay on the sidelines of this. She's got
a real shot of winning.
And [music]
if she doesn't win, and I stayed out of
it, well, that could be on me. There's
an opportunity
with my popularity in that district,
with the resources I can bring to it,
that I can help push her there."
So, he decides to add [music] her to his
slate, the third candidate.
And this is the decision, more than any
[music] other, that really makes the
Democratic establishment, black and
Latino Democrats, [music]
labor unions, go ballistic.
Because they say, "It's one thing to go
against an incumbent like Dan Goldman in
a district that he's out of step with.
It's another to compete for an open seat
and upset the outgoing congresswoman.
But to go after the chairman of the
Congressional Hispanic Caucus, the first
formally undocumented immigrant in
Congress, someone who actually is
objectively pretty progressive on every
issue except for Israel, and that's key,
is a bridge further. I mean, that is
much more provocative."
>> And somebody that Mondani had given his
assurances to that he would support in
this very race.
>> Precisely. And so, a lot of them look at
that and also say, "What good is the
mayor's word if he's going to go back on
it here? How can we trust this guy going
forward?" So, now, with three districts
now in play, this fight just kind of
keeps growing outward. So, labor unions
become very involved. Prominent New York
Democrats like Jeffries, who are close
with Espaillat, get involved. They start
campaigning on the ground. Super PACs
start dropping millions of dollars for
and against candidates on both sides of
the race. The mayor throws himself
aggressively into the slate. And it's
worth noting, he has gone way above and
beyond what even an endorsing mayor
might do in a race.
>> WE NEED CLAIRE VALDEZ, SANDY ARISTIA
AVILA CHEVALIER.
AND BRAD LANDER, FIGHTING FOR US IN THIS
>> HE'S BEEN raising money. He's been
offering strategy advice. He was out on
the campaign trail in the final weeks.
Exactly. He held a big rally with Bernie
Sanders.
Some of it, frankly, gets ugly. Avila
Chevalier, who is a PhD student and
relatively untested, it turns out that
her history as an activist left her with
a trove of inflammatory and polarizing
tweets. Among the most circulated were
tweets that attacked the Democratic
Party. In one of them, she said, "F
Kamala Harris." And other ones expressed
policy positions that were really far
outside of the mainstream. So, again,
among the most prominent was one where
she basically said, "All deportations
are bad. We shouldn't be removing
anybody from this country under any
circumstance."
>> Clearly very out of step with the
majority of Americans.
>> Exactly.
>> Okay, I can see why you described all of
these as risks and Mondaire Jones taking
a big gamble in this race because
if these candidates end up losing,
not only has Mondaire Jones not
installed his allies in Congress, he has
really alienated people who supported
him in his initial race for mayor. He
has potentially damaged his coalition
for the next time he might want to run.
And never mind the fact that he has made
it harder for him to accomplish his
agenda.
>> Mhm. And made some pretty powerful
enemies.
>> Sure.
And, of course, we know in the end,
gamble pays off. Mondaire Jones had a
huge victory on Tuesday night because
all of his candidates won.
>> All of his candidates won and I just
want to add in convincing fashion.
Lander won by almost 30 points. Valdez
won by about 20 points. And if you look
at Chevalier had a narrower margin but
somewhat comfortable four points over a
powerful incumbent.
>> [music]
>> They were margins so big that even Mayor
Mondaire and his allies were surprised
and so big that they sent shockwaves
that went not just throughout the five
boroughs of New York City but frankly
well beyond and right now are rattling
the foundations of the Democratic Party.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Nick, I want to talk about what this
clean sweep that we saw from the DSA
actually means. So let's start small and
go big. So first, what does it mean for
Mondaire and his agenda here in New York
City?
>> I think that for the mayor one of the
most important things that this election
showed is that he was no fluke. In fact,
he may be a political kingmaker in New
York. That his political capital can be
transferred to other candidates and give
them a real shot at winning races across
the city.
>> It's interesting that a guy who
essentially ran against the
establishment who derided the whole idea
of kingmakers has now become one.
>> Yeah, I think he would say I'm not a
kingmaker, I'm a movement leader. But I
think kingmaker is an apt term. I mean
this is someone now who seems to be
among the most popular political figures
in New York.
As his own team would say, he has a huge
amount of political capital and he's not
afraid to use it. And I think that's the
other thing that this has shown us. He
is willing to take risks and in this
case the risk paid off and he not only
now has new allies but he also has other
Democrats in the system, people in the
city council, people in Albany, the
governor who are seeing that his
political power is real and they're
going to have to respond to it. And so
when they get into fights about his
agenda, about how to pay for child care,
about whether to raise taxes,
you can really bet that going forward,
he's going to be coming in with a
stronger hand.
>> Right. What about on the national level
though, Nick? Cuz we know in Congress,
Hakeem Jeffries, House Minority Leader,
he has been focused on winning control
back from the Republicans. So, what does
he make of all of this?
>> For Hakeem Jeffries, there are very
specific implications and much broader
ones for his party. Specifically, two of
the candidates in this race, Avella
Chevalier and Valdez, have not committed
to backing him in a leadership fight
next year when he's trying to become
speaker.
>> Mhm.
>> They could become real thorns in his
side in Washington. But I think that the
bigger implication, both for Jeffries'
politics in New York City and in
Washington,
is that this is going to give the left a
much bigger platform, the Mondaire left
specifically, to advance its ideas at a
time when Democrats are really in this
big national argument about what they
want to be as a party. And Mondaire and
his allies have a very specific vision.
It's anti-corporate power, it's big
government, it's tax the rich, it's pay
for social services to help working
people, and it's pull the United States
away from its alliance with Israel.
And on each of those issues,
now they're going to be speaking in a
louder way, and in a way that frankly
may cause problems for Jeffries
>> Right.
>> as he looks towards the midterms this
fall, where races are not going to be
won and lost in deep blue New York City,
but in swing districts across the
country.
>> But this new wave of progressive
Democrats, they obviously represent a
lot of frustration that Democrats have
with the Democratic Party, with
Democratic leadership, and that's got to
be on the minds of some of the more
establishment Democrats, of course.
And I wonder whether it's possible to
pull apart how much we saw on Tuesday
could be attributed to that frustration,
and how much can be attributed to the
pull of Mondani as you have described
it?
>> I think there is no doubt as we've been
watching primaries play out across the
country this year.
And frankly, ever since Donald Trump was
elected, the Democrats are really
frustrated with their leadership.
They're frustrated that they lost to
Trump in the first place, and they're
frustrated that they have not been able
to stop him from enacting much of his
agenda over the first couple of years.
And so,
in any election like this, I think there
is a degree to which voters are coming
out to vote against the status quo.
They're going to look at any candidate
that's backed by leadership and be
against them. And that's got to be
concerning for Jeffries because
if that spreads across the country
enough, he could end up with an unruly
caucus or nominees in close contests
that can't win against Republicans.
But I also think that there is something
undeniably particular happening in New
York City where Mondani, who is
in some ways a product of that
discontent himself, is also able to kind
of harness it and put a frame around it
and direct that energy behind a
particular alternative. And so, what I
think he did in these races that was
risky, but also powerful,
was by associating himself so much with
these other candidates, he was kind of
able to link together races that might
otherwise have been sleepy, disparate
primaries thought about different
things, and make them all kind of a
referendum on what the Democratic Party
is right now. His version versus the
status quo. And so, that kind of
amplifies both the discontent and it
offers a particular alternative and
tries to put some force behind it so
that it can become, you know, more
relevant in national politics. And
New York City, of course, is in some
ways an anomaly, but in some ways it has
often been a leading indicator in
politics. I mean, this is the place,
after all, where Jeffries is from, but
so is Chuck Schumer, the Senate Majority
Leader. And it's the place that in 2018,
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez
won her own surprise Democratic primary
against Joe Crowley and launched
basically a progressive movement that
did meaningfully push the Democratic
Party left and led to all kinds of
incumbents falling across the country.
So, I think anyone who doesn't take this
seriously does so at their own peril.
>> Okay, I understand how all of these
dynamics play out in places that are
very blue, where it's basically Democrat
versus Democrat, right? But just looking
forward to the midterms,
the very far left politics that these
candidates won on, I wonder how that
might translate to races that are much
tighter in places that are purple, for
example, right? Or saying something
like, "I don't believe in deportations."
is really going to turn off voters,
potentially.
>> I think this is a question a lot of
Democrats are asking today. And those
who are on the winning side would say,
"Well, they're going to help us." The
Democratic Party is losing across the
country because regular people are not
into our ideas. They think we're not
fighting for them. We think we're not
committed to the right issues. And we're
trying to push the party towards a place
that we think it can win. Now, a lot of
those people are not actually living in
the kind of districts you're talking
about out in the suburbs of New York or
in the middle of the country in the
Midwest, wherever it may be. And the
candidates running there, I think look
at these results and are a little
worried.
Republicans have shown they are very
adept at taking the extreme comments of
lefties in New York City or Chicago or
LA and broadcasting them all over the
country and saying,
"You may think you're voting for this
reasonable moderate candidate, but
you're voting to empower a party that is
so crazy and outside of the mainstream,
they're going to do X or Y or Z."
>> Uh they want a lot of communists to come
in. I'm saying it on
>> And that's exactly what we started to
hear from Republicans just hours after
the election results became clear.
>> The people that they're pushing are
communists and this country is not going
to have communists. Thank you.
>> President Trump himself, Speaker Mike
Johnson in the house
>> The Democrat Party, the socialists, the
Marxists have nominated some of the most
radical candidates to ever run for
office and they're running for Congress.
>> warned that Marxists and socialists like
those in New York City were going to be
cropping up all over the country.
>> The
>> Right. If these DSA members end up
working against the Democratic brand
nationally in the midterms,
that could actually feel like a loss for
Mondaire Jones, right? Like he could get
blamed for taking a big risk on these
candidates that is then seen as
backfiring.
>> I think that is certainly a risk for
him. But I think to give the mayor his
say what he would allow is that he's
probably going to get blamed and
attacked anyway. He's already one of the
most visible left-leading politicians in
the country. And so why not take a big
swing at trying to push the party to a
place where he thinks he might actually
help them by advancing ideas that he
really believes are not only attractive
to many Democrats, but also can be
attractive and persuasive and activating
to people who have either been turned
off by the political process altogether
or maybe voted for Republicans who feel
like basically the system is not working
for them. The people who frankly he was
able to bring out in large numbers in
his mayoral election who don't typically
vote or in some cases had voted for
Donald Trump for president and then came
around to support him.
>> Does this Nick feel to you like a
potential mirror of what happened on the
right, which is that populists took over
the mainstream of the Republican Party?
>> I think in many ways there are
similarities. I mean, whether you look
at the Tea Party after President Obama
was elected or you look at Donald
Trump's rise in the 2016 Republican
primary.
There was a very similar situation on
their side. After losing a series of
elections,
there was a faction within the
Republican Party who came in and said,
"We've got it all wrong. We've got to
change drastically if we're going to win
across the country." And they went on to
start winning races, and we find
ourselves where we do now.
Democrats right now are trying to figure
out, "How do we get our mojo back?" And
I don't think we're going to have a true
answer for a couple of years until we
have candidates on the presidential
debate stage and vying for the attention
of the entire country.
>> It sounds like the big question going
into the midterms is basically
whether the far-left views of these
candidates that might be seen as turning
off a lot of moderate voters, whether
that will push more people away than the
broadly popular economic and anti-Israel
messaging, frankly, that we have seen
that might attract them.
>> The midterms will give us one answer to
that question. And I think that the
presidential election that's waiting
right behind it will give an even bigger
one.
Because Democrats, not just here in New
York, but in races from Maine to
Michigan to other places, are testing
out their tolerance right now for
ideas and labels that previously would
have been seen as outside the
mainstream, that might have been seen as
disqualifying, and deciding, "Is that
something that we like? Is that
something we're willing to tolerate
because of the energy and dynamism and
the freshness of what they're bringing
to the table? Or do we want to retreat
to something more familiar to try and
win over our neighbors who are not
already on board?"
>> [music]
>> And that's going to be a raucous,
multi-stage
fight. And so, Tuesday night in New York
might just have been the opening bell.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Nick, thanks so much.
>> It was my pleasure.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Wednesday, President Trump plunged
Congress into chaos after he abruptly
canceled the signing of a bipartisan
housing measure, demanding, once again,
that Republicans pass highly contentious
voting restrictions [music] ahead of the
midterms, even though they say they
don't have the votes needed to pass.
Republicans had hoped that the sweeping
housing bill would project a unified
[music] effort to address affordability,
one of the top issues for voters, before
Congress heads home for the 4th of July
break.
Instead, even as the stage for [music]
the signing ceremony was being erected
in the capital, the president blindsided
his allies and emboldened critics of
[music] the bill, and effectively
brought Congress to a standstill.
And,
rescue crews raced early Thursday to
find survivors [music] of two powerful
earthquakes that toppled dozens of
buildings in Venezuela, killing at least
32 people [music] and injuring 700
others.
The full scale of the damage was not
immediately [music] clear, but one of
the quakes that struck on Wednesday was
the strongest hit Venezuela in more than
a century.
President Delcy Rodriguez, who announced
the initial toll of deaths and injuries,
declared a state [music] of emergency.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Jack
Dizzodoro, Stella Tan, and Austa
Shabbaty.
It was edited by Paige Cowett and
Patricia Willens, and contains music by
Dan Powell, Pat McCusker, [music] and
Rowan Nemixto.
Our theme music is by Wonderly, and this
episode was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The [music] Daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.